Beginners course module 2 (#2495)
qdrant/landing_page: qdrant-landing/content/course/beginners/module-2/_index.md

---
title: "Module 2: First Principles of Vector Search"
short_description: "Module 2 of the Beginners course: anatomy of a vector - how data is stored, indexed, and retrieved in Qdrant."
description: "Understand collections, points, vectors, payloads, HNSW, chunking, and the ingestion pipeline. Move from theory to actual system design in Qdrant."
isLesson: true
weight: 30
---

{{< date >}} Module 2 {{< /date >}}

# First Principles of Vector Search

> Anatomy of a vector - how data is stored, indexed, and retrieved. Move from theory to actual system design in Qdrant.

Reviewer: > Anatomy of a vector

Seems out of place

## Today's path

1. From Idea to System
2. Core Data Model
3. Distance Metrics
4. Top-K Retrieval
5. How Search is Fast: HNSW
6. Payload Filtering
7. Chunking Strategies
8. Ingestion Pipeline: End-to-End
9. References & Further Reading

By the end, you'll understand every building block needed to go from raw text to a running Qdrant collection.

## 1. From Idea to System

In Module 1, we saw how search evolved from matching words to understanding meaning. Now we move from theory to actual system design. This module covers every building block you need to go from raw text to a running Qdrant collection.

📝
**Raw Text**
Documents, articles, PDFs

✂️
**Chunk**
Split into passages

🧠
**Embed**
Convert to vectors

🗄️
**Store**
Upsert to Qdrant

🔍
**Query**
Retrieve top-K results

> 

Reviewer: Let's not use emojis

Reviewer: A diagram would be good here though

## 2. Core Data Model

> Qdrant organizes data in a simple three-level hierarchy. Understanding this structure is the foundation for everything else in the course.

Reviewer: We have a diagram [here](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/overview/#data-structure) that would probably be good to use

### Creating a Collection

When you create a collection, you fix two things: the size of vectors it will accept and the distance metric used for similarity.

```python
from qdrant_client import QdrantClient, models

client = QdrantClient(":memory:")  # or use cloud URL + API key

client.create_collection(
    collection_name="articles",
    vectors_config=models.VectorParams(
        size=384,                      # must match your embedding model
        distance=models.Distance.COSINE,
    ),
)
```

### Inserting a Point

Each point carries an ID, a vector (the embedding of your content), and a payload (any metadata you want to filter or return later).

```python
from qdrant_client.models import PointStruct

client.upsert(
    collection_name="articles",
    points=[
        PointStruct(
            id=1,
            vector=[0.12, -0.87, 0.33, ...],   # 384-dim embedding
            payload={
                "title":    "Car Repair Guide",
                "category": "automotive",
                "year":     2024,

>                 "region":   "EU",

Reviewer: I don't like these padded leading spaces on the values

            },
        )
    ],
)
```

## 3. Distance Metrics

When you query a collection, Qdrant computes similarity between your query vector and every stored vector using the distance metric you chose at collection creation. The most common for text is cosine similarity.

| Metric | Best for | Notes |
|--------|----------|-------|
| models.Distance.COSINE | Text, NLP models (default) | Measures angle between vectors. Robust to magnitude differences. |
| models.Distance.DOT | Normalized embeddings | Faster than cosine when vectors are unit-length at index time. |
| models.Distance.EUCLID | Image embeddings, spatial | Measures absolute distance. Sensitive to vector magnitude. |

> | models.Distance.MANHATTAN | Sparse, high-dimensional | Sum of absolute differences. Useful for very sparse vectors. |

Reviewer: get rid of the "Best for" column. These can vary

### Rule

Choose your distance metric at collection creation - it cannot be changed later. Match it to the metric your embedding model was trained with. Most sentence-transformer models use cosine.

## 4. Top-K Retrieval

A search query is itself a vector. Qdrant finds the K points in the collection whose vectors are most similar to the query vector, ranked by similarity score.

```python
results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[0.12, -0.87, 0.33, ...],   # your query vector
    limit=3,                            # return top 3
)

for r in results.points:
    print(r.id, r.score, r.payload)
```

### Why K matters

> Returning too few results (K=3) misses relevant content. Returning too many (K=100) passes noise to the LLM. In RAG pipelines, a common pattern is to retrieve K=20–50 with Qdrant, then rerank to K=5 for the LLM context window.

Reviewer: > passes noise to the LLM

Let's not limit this to RAG. Just say:

> creates noise in resuts

Reviewer: At the end say

> We'll explain reranking later

## 5. How Search is Fast: HNSW

Searching millions of vectors by computing similarity against every single one (brute force) is prohibitively slow. Qdrant uses HNSW - Hierarchical Navigable Small World - a graph-based approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) index that makes large-scale search fast without sacrificing meaningful accuracy.

### How HNSW Works

> 

Reviewer: This needs a diagram

### Tunable Parameters

You can fine-tune the HNSW graph to balance search speed, recall accuracy, memory usage, and indexing time. Three key parameters:

| Parameter | What it controls | Trade-off |
|-----------|------------------|-----------|
| m | Number of bidirectional links per node in the graph | Higher = better recall, more memory |
| hnsw_ef | Size of the candidate list during search (query time) | Higher = better recall, slower search |
| ef_construct | Size of the candidate list during index building | Higher = better graph quality, slower indexing |

```python
client.create_collection(
    collection_name="articles",
    vectors_config=models.VectorParams(size=384, distance=models.Distance.COSINE),
    hnsw_config=models.HnswConfigDiff(
        m=16,              # default: 16
        ef_construct=100,  # default: 100
    ),
)

# Override ef at query time for recall vs. speed trade-off:
results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[...],
    search_params=models.SearchParams(hnsw_ef=128),
    limit=10,
)
```

> 

Reviewer: Add:

> To learn more about tuning HNSW, see the comprehensive Qdrant Essentials Course.

results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[...],
    query_filter=Filter(
        must=[
            FieldCondition(
                key="category",
                match=MatchValue(value="automotive")
            )
        ]
    ),
    limit=5,
)
```

### Filter Types

| Condition | What it does | Example use case |
|-----------|--------------|------------------|
| must | All conditions must be true (AND logic) | Category = automotive AND year >= 2022 |
| should | At least one condition must be true (OR logic) | Category = automotive OR category = transport |
| must_not | Exclude matching points | Exclude documents flagged as deleted or expired |
| Range | Numeric range comparisons (gte, lte, gt, lt) | year between 2020 and 2024 |
| Geo | Geospatial radius or bounding box filter | Restaurants within 5 km of user location |

### Index your filter fields

For fields you filter on frequently, create a payload index. Without an index, Qdrant scans every payload at query time. With one, filtered queries run in logarithmic time. Use client.create_payload_index() for any field that appears in must, should, or must_not conditions.

> 

Reviewer: Point to documentation about creating payload indexes for further reading

- **Too large a chunk**: Exceeds model token limit. One embedding represents many topics - retrieval becomes imprecise.
- **Too small a chunk**: Loses surrounding context. Retrieved chunks are too short to be useful as LLM context.

| Strategy | How it works | Example | Best for | Trade-off |
|----------|--------------|---------|-----------|-----------|
| Fixed-Size | Split every N tokens regardless of content boundaries | Every 500 tokens = 1 chunk | Simple RAG pipelines, fast preprocessing, uniform collections | May cut sentences mid-thought; context loss at boundaries |
| Semantic | Create a new chunk when topic or meaning shifts significantly | New chunk when subject changes | High-quality retrieval over long, varied documents | Slower preprocessing; requires a sentence model to detect shifts |
| Sliding Window | Chunks overlap with each other to preserve context continuity | Chunk 1: tokens 1–500, Chunk 2: tokens 400–900 | Conversational RAG, avoiding context loss at chunk edges | Increases storage and retrieval cost; duplicate content in results |

> 

Reviewer: Create a diagram here

  - Cosine, dot product, Euclidean, Manhattan - when to use each metric and why.

- **Chunking Strategies** - [Text Chunking Strategies - Qdrant](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/guides/collection_setup/)
  - Fixed-size, semantic, sliding window, and advanced strategies with a full comparison table.

- **HNSW Deep Dive** - [HNSW Indexing Fundamentals - Qdrant](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/concepts/indexing/#hnsw)
  - How the graph index is built, how search traverses it, and a full parameter summary.

- **Filtering Reference** - [Filtering - Qdrant](https://qdrant.tech/documentation/concepts/filtering/)
  - Full filter syntax: must, should, must_not, range, geo, and payload index configuration.

- **Qdrant Cloud** - [Qdrant Cloud](https://cloud.qdrant.io/)
  - Create a free cluster and follow the quickstart to run your first query in under 5 minutes.

## What's Next - Module 3

Next, we'll explore:

- Sparse vs. dense search - when keyword precision beats semantic similarity
- Hybrid search - combining dense + sparse in a single query with RRF fusion
- Multimodal inputs - text, image, audio in one vector space

> - Real-world use cases: e-commerce, anomaly detection, and more

Reviewer: Are "Real-world use cases" still part of the course?

| should | At least one condition must be true (OR logic) | Category = automotive OR category = transport |
| must_not | Exclude matching points | Exclude documents flagged as deleted or expired |
| Range | Numeric range comparisons (gte, lte, gt, lt) | year between 2020 and 2024 |
| Geo | Geospatial radius or bounding box filter | Restaurants within 5 km of user location |

```python
from qdrant_client.models import Filter, FieldCondition, MatchValue

results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[...],
    query_filter=Filter(
        must=[
            FieldCondition(
                # the payload field to check
                key="category",  
                # keep only points where category == "automotive"
                match=MatchValue(value="automotive")  
            )
        ]
    ),
    limit=5,
)
```

### Index Your Filter Fields

For fields you filter frequently, create a payload index. Without one, Qdrant may need to check payload values across many points at query time. With one, it can look up matching points directly, making filtered queries faster.

> Use `client.create_payload_index()` for fields used in `must`, `should`, or `must_not` conditions. See [Payload Indexing](https://deploy-preview-2495--condescending-goldwasser-91acf0.netlify.app/documentation/manage-data/indexing/#payload-index) for supported index types and configuration options.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use `client.create_payload_index()` for fields used in `must`, `should`, or `must_not` conditions. See [Payload Indexing](/documentation/manage-data/indexing/#payload-index) for supported index types and configuration options.
```

![Payload filtering applied during HNSW graph traversal](/courses/beginners/module-2/payload.png)

## 7. Chunking Strategies

Embedding models have a maximum token limit. `all-MiniLM-L6-v2` from Module 1 takes 256 tokens, larger models take 8,000 or more, and anything past the limit is dropped without an error. Check your model's card for its limit. <br>
Fitting isn't the only reason to split. A chunk is the unit that gets retrieved, so one vector covering several topics averages them together and matches every query weakly, while a chunk that's too small loses the context that made the result useful.

| Strategy | How it works | Trade-off |
|----------|--------------|-----------|
| Fixed-Size | Split every N tokens regardless of content boundaries | May cut sentences mid-thought |
| Semantic | New chunk when topic or meaning shifts | Slower; needs a model to detect shifts |
| Sliding Window | Chunks overlap to preserve context across the cut | More storage; duplicate content across results |

<aside role="status">

> This module introduces the main chunking strategies but doesn’t explore how to choose between them in depth. For a detailed comparison and worked examples, see [Chunking Strategies](https://deploy-preview-2495--condescending-goldwasser-91acf0.netlify.app/course/essentials/day-1/chunking-strategies/#text-chunking-strategy-comparison) in the Qdrant Essentials course.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<aside role="status">

This module introduces the main chunking strategies but doesn’t explore how to choose between them in depth. For a detailed comparison and worked examples, see [Chunking Strategies](/course/essentials/day-1/chunking-strategies/#text-chunking-strategy-comparison) in the Qdrant Essentials course.
```

---
title: "Module 2: First Principles of Vector Search"
short_description: "Module 2 of the Beginners course: how data is stored, indexed, and retrieved in Qdrant."
description: "Understand collections, points, vectors, payloads, HNSW, chunking, and the ingestion pipeline. Move from theory to actual system design in Qdrant."
isLesson: true
weight: 30
---

{{< date >}} Module 2 {{< /date >}}

# First Principles of Vector Search

<div class="video">
<iframe

>   src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zrUswSTeQMI?rel=0"

Reviewer: Video needs updating to our final video, with thumbnail loaded, audio leveled, etc

  frameborder="0"
  allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share"
  referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin"
  allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
</div>

Understand collections, points, vectors, payloads, and the HNSW index, and move from theory to actual system design in Qdrant.

**Follow-along code**: [Module 2 notebook](https://github.com/qdrant/examples/blob/master/course/beginners/Module2.ipynb)

<br/>

> #### TL;DR

Reviewer: This is not a "TLDR", it's an overview. A "TLDR" summarizes the page, an "Overview" tells you what you will learn. Change the content of the TLDR or the name of the section. Apply consistently across all modules

> Module 1 explained why semantic search works. In this module, you’ll learn 
where your data lives and how Qdrant searches it. You’ll explore collections,
points, vectors, payloads, and distance metrics, then see how Qdrant finds the 
top-k matches without scanning every vector. You’ll also learn how to filter
results by metadata and split long documents into smaller chunks before embedding
them. By the end, you’ll have created a collection, stored points, and run 

> your first filtered query.

Reviewer: Not sure why these are all on separate lines. Will render weird.

## Today's Path

1. From Idea to System
2. Core Data Model
3. Distance Metrics
4. Top-K Retrieval
5. Fast Approximate Search: HNSW
6. Payload Filtering
7. Chunking Strategies
8. Ingestion Pipeline: End-to-End
9. References & Further Reading

## 1. From Idea to System

In Module 1, we saw how search evolved from matching words to understanding meaning. Now we move from theory to actual system design. This module covers every building block you need to go from raw text to a running Qdrant collection.

- **Raw Text**
Documents, articles, PDFs

- **Chunk**
Split into passages

- **Embed**
Convert to dense vectors

- **Store**
Upsert to Qdrant: insert a point if its ID is new, update it if the ID already exists

- **Query**
Retrieve the top-K results: the K most similar matches to your query

![Pipeline from raw text to a Qdrant query: chunk, embed, store, query](/courses/beginners/module-2/flow.png)

## 2. Core Data Model

> Qdrant organizes data in a simple three-level hierarchy. Understanding this structure is the foundation for everything else in the course.

Reviewer: I wouldn't call this a "hierarchy" since they are not layered hierarchically. Rather they are components of the same point object

> ![Qdrant's three-level data hierarchy: collection, point, and vector](/courses/beginners/module-2/data-model.png)

Reviewer: diagram title should be removed. Graphic is off-brand

### Collection

Like a table in a relational database. Stores vectors of a fixed size and a chosen distance metric. Every point in a collection must have a vector of the same dimension.

### Point

The atomic unit of data. Every point has an ID (integer or UUID), a vector, and an optional payload. Points are what you search, retrieve, and filter.

### Vector

A vector is a list of numbers. An embedding is a vector created by a model to represent the meaning of content. In semantic search, a dense vector is usually an embedding generated from text, images, or other data.<br>

> Each number represents one dimension of the vector. Similar content produces similar vectors, making it easier to find related items. Dense vectors usually contain values across most dimensions. This module focuses on dense vectors; Module 3 introduces sparse vectors, which contain mostly zeros.

Reviewer: need a line break before this

### Payload

Custom JSON metadata attached to a point. Used for filtering, retrieval scoping, and result enrichment. Can hold strings, numbers, booleans, geo coordinates, or arrays.

### Your Qdrant Cluster

To create a collection, you need a running Qdrant instance, or **cluster**. A cluster is a Qdrant deployment that stores your collections and handles requests. You can use Qdrant Cloud or run Qdrant yourself locally. Qdrant Cloud offers a free tier that takes about a minute to set up. Module 0 walks you through the process with screenshots.

```python
from qdrant_client import QdrantClient, models

client = QdrantClient(
    # your cluster URL, from Module 0
    url="https://xyz-example.eu-west-1-0.aws.cloud.qdrant.io",  
    # your cluster API key, from Module 0
    api_key="<your-api-key>",                                    
)
# For quick, throwaway experiments without a server, you can also use:
# client = QdrantClient(":memory:")
```

### Creating a Collection

> Once connected, you create a collection by setting two parameters: the size of the vectors it accepts and the distance metric used for similarity. <br>

Reviewer: remove `<br>`

Both come from your embedding model. 384 is the vector size of all-MiniLM-L6-v2, the model from Module 1, and cosine is the metric it was trained for.

```python
client.create_collection(
    collection_name="articles",
    vectors_config=models.VectorParams(
        # 384: the vector size of all-MiniLM-L6-v2, from Module 1
        size=384,                     
        distance=models.Distance.COSINE,
    ),
)
```

### Inserting a Point

> Each point contains an ID, a vector that represents your content, and a payload with metadata you can use to filter or return results later. <br>

Reviewer: remove `<br>`

Use `upsert` to add a point to a collection. If the ID is new, Qdrant inserts the point. If the ID already exists, Qdrant updates the existing point.

```python
from qdrant_client.models import PointStruct  # represents a single point: id, vector, and payload

client.upsert(
    collection_name="articles",
    points=[
        PointStruct(
            id=1,
            vector=[0.12, -0.87, 0.33, ...],   # 384-dim embedding
            payload={
                "title": "Car Repair Guide",
                "category": "automotive",
                "year": 2024,
                "region": "EU",
            },
        )
    ],
)
```

## 3. Distance Metrics

> When you query a collection, Qdrant compares your query vector with the stored vectors using the distance metric you chose when creating the collection. For text embeddings, cosine similarity is the most common metric. <br> 

Reviewer: remove `<br>`

 If you choose the wrong metric, you have two options. You can create a new collection with the correct metric and re-ingest your data. A <a href="/documentation/manage-data/collections/#collection-aliases">collection alias</a> lets you switch to the new collection without changing your application.

Since v1.18, you can also add a second named vector with the correct metric to the existing collection. Re-embed your points into the new vector, then remove the old one. See <a href="/documentation/manage-data/collections/#update-vector-schema">Update Vector Schema</a> for details.
</aside>

## 4. Top-K Retrieval

A search query is converted into a vector using the same embedding model used to embed your documents. Qdrant finds the K points in the collection whose vectors are most similar to the query vector, ranked by similarity score.

```python
results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[0.12, -0.87, 0.33, ...],   # your query vector
    limit=3,                            # return top 3
)

for r in results.points:
    print(r.id, r.score, r.payload)
```

> ![Top-K retrieval returning the K closest vectors to a query vector](/courses/beginners/module-2/top-k.png)

Reviewer: diagram is off-brand style

### Why K Matters

Returning too few results (K=3) misses relevant content. Returning too many (K=100) creates noise in results. A common approach is to overfetch: retrieve a larger candidate pool, then rerank it down to the smaller K you actually show the user. Qdrant supports this natively via [multi-stage queries](/documentation/search/hybrid-queries/#multi-stage-queries) - for example, prefetching a large candidate set and reranking it down to a much smaller final `limit`. We'll cover reranking in detail later.

## 5. Fast Approximate Search: HNSW

Searching millions of vectors by computing similarity against every single one (brute force) is slow. Qdrant uses HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World), a graph-based approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) index that makes large-scale search fast at a small, measurable recall cost.

> ![HNSW graph with hierarchical layers connecting nearest-neighbor nodes](/courses/beginners/module-2/hnsw.png)

Reviewer: red is off-brand it seems

### How HNSW Works

- **Graph structure**: Each vector is a node. Nodes are connected to their nearest neighbors by bidirectional edges, forming a navigable graph.
- **Hierarchical layers**: The graph has multiple layers. The top layer has few nodes and long-range connections. Lower layers are denser with short-range connections.
- **Search by traversal**: Query entry starts at the top layer. The search "jumps" through neighbors, zooming in on the region of interest at each layer.
- **Approximate, not exact**: HNSW trades some recall (see below) for massive speed gains. Whether that trade-off is worth it depends on your data and queries, so measure recall on queries representative of your actual workload rather than assuming it.

### Tunable Parameters

> HNSW exposes three tunable parameters: `m`, `ef_construct`, and `hnsw_ef`. They balance search speed, recall (the fraction of true nearest neighbors found), memory usage, and indexing time. <br>

Reviewer: remove `<br>`

| Geo | Geospatial radius or bounding box filter | Restaurants within 5 km of user location |

```python
from qdrant_client.models import Filter, FieldCondition, MatchValue

results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[...],
    query_filter=Filter(
        must=[
            FieldCondition(
                # the payload field to check
                key="category",  
                # keep only points where category == "automotive"
                match=MatchValue(value="automotive")  
            )
        ]
    ),
    limit=5,
)
```

### Index Your Filter Fields

For fields you filter frequently, create a payload index. Without one, Qdrant may need to check payload values across many points at query time. With one, it can look up matching points directly, making filtered queries faster.

Use `client.create_payload_index()` for fields used in `must`, `should`, or `must_not` conditions. See [Payload Indexing](/documentation/manage-data/indexing/#payload-index) for supported index types and configuration options.

![Payload filtering applied during HNSW graph traversal](/courses/beginners/module-2/payload.png)

## 7. Chunking Strategies

> Embedding models have a maximum token limit. `all-MiniLM-L6-v2` from Module 1 takes 256 tokens, larger models take 8,000 or more, and anything past the limit is dropped without an error. Check your model's card for its limit. <br>

Reviewer: remove `<br>`

Fitting isn't the only reason to split. A chunk is the unit that gets retrieved, so one vector covering several topics averages them together and matches every query weakly, while a chunk that's too small loses the context that made the result useful.

| Strategy | How it works | Trade-off |
|----------|--------------|-----------|
| Fixed-Size | Split every N tokens regardless of content boundaries | May cut sentences mid-thought |
| Semantic | New chunk when topic or meaning shifts | Slower; needs a model to detect shifts |
| Sliding Window | Chunks overlap to preserve context across the cut | More storage; duplicate content across results |

<aside role="status">

> This module introduces the main chunking strategies but doesn’t explore how to choose between them in depth. For a detailed comparison and worked examples, see [Chunking Strategies](/course/essentials/day-1/chunking-strategies/#text-chunking-strategy-comparison) in the Qdrant Essentials course.

Reviewer: diagram is off-brand

---
title: "Module 2: First Principles of Vector Search"
short_description: "Module 2 of the Beginners course: how data is stored, indexed, and retrieved in Qdrant."
description: "Understand collections, points, vectors, payloads, HNSW, chunking, and the ingestion pipeline. Move from theory to actual system design in Qdrant."
isLesson: true
weight: 30
---

{{< date >}} Module 2 {{< /date >}}

# First Principles of Vector Search

<div class="video">
<iframe
  src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zrUswSTeQMI?rel=0"
  frameborder="0"
  allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share"
  referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin"
  allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
</div>

Understand collections, points, vectors, payloads, and the HNSW index, and move from theory to actual system design in Qdrant.

**Follow along in Colab:** <a href="https://colab.research.google.com/github/qdrant/examples/blob/master/Beginner-course/Module2.ipynb">
  <img src="https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg" style="display:inline; margin:0;" alt="Open In Colab"/>
</a>

<br/>

> **TL;DR:** Module 1 explained *why* semantic search works. This module is about *where the data actually lives*: how Qdrant organizes collections, points, vectors, and payloads; how it finds your top-K matches fast using an index called HNSW instead of scanning everything; how to filter results by metadata; how to split long documents into chunks before embedding them; and how all of that comes together into one working ingestion pipeline, from an empty cluster to your first filtered query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TL;DR: Module 1 explained why semantic search works. In this module, you’ll learn where your data lives and how Qdrant searches it. <br>
You’ll explore collections, points, vectors, payloads, and distance metrics, then see how Qdrant finds the top-k matches without scanning every vector. <br>
You’ll also learn how to filter results by metadata and split long documents into smaller chunks before embedding them. <br>
By the end, you’ll have created a collection, stored points, and run your first filtered query.
```
Reads better than a running sentence

## 1. From Idea to System

In Module 1, we saw how search evolved from matching words to understanding meaning. Now we move from theory to actual system design. This module covers every building block you need to go from raw text to a running Qdrant collection.

- **Raw Text**
Documents, articles, PDFs

- **Chunk**
Split into passages

- **Embed**
Convert to dense vectors

- **Store**
Upsert to Qdrant: insert a point if its ID is new, update it if the ID already exists

- **Query**
Retrieve the top-K results: the K most similar matches to your query

![](/courses/beginners/module-2/flow.png)

## 2. Core Data Model

Qdrant organizes data in a simple three-level hierarchy. Understanding this structure is the foundation for everything else in the course.

![](/courses/beginners/module-2/data-model.png)

### Collection

Like a table in a relational database. Stores vectors of a fixed size and a chosen distance metric. Every point in a collection must have a vector of the same dimension.

### Point

The atomic unit of data. Every point has an ID (integer or UUID), a vector, and an optional payload. Points are what you search, retrieve, and filter.

### Vector

> A dense vector: a list of floating-point numbers (such as 384 or 768 values, known as dimensions), almost all non-zero, that represent the meaning of the original content. Similar content produces similar vectors. This module focuses on dense vectors; Module 3 introduces sparse vectors and hybrid search.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A vector is a list of numbers. An embedding is a vector created by a model to represent the meaning of content. In semantic search, a dense vector is usually an embedding generated from text, images, or other data.<br>
Each number represents one dimension of the vector. Similar content produces similar vectors, making it easier to find related items. Dense vectors usually contain values across most dimensions. This module focuses on dense vectors; Module 3 introduces sparse vectors, which contain mostly zeros.
```
Probably the most important concept, expanded to both dense and sparse + Explained embeddings

### Payload

Custom JSON metadata attached to a point. Used for filtering, retrieval scoping, and result enrichment. Can hold strings, numbers, booleans, geo coordinates, or arrays.

![](/courses/beginners/module-2/payload.png)

### Your Qdrant Cluster

> A collection needs a running Qdrant instance, a **cluster** (a running deployment of Qdrant that hosts your collections and serves requests), to live in. Qdrant Cloud has a free tier that takes about a minute to set up; Module 0 walks through it step by step, screenshots included. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To create a collection, you need a running Qdrant instance, or **cluster**. A cluster is a Qdrant deployment that stores your collections and handles requests. You can use Qdrant Cloud or run Qdrant yourself locally. Qdrant Cloud offers a free tier that takes about a minute to set up. Module 0 walks you through the process with screenshots.
```
Added mention of self-host, this is good to know as a possibility

```python
from qdrant_client import QdrantClient, models

client = QdrantClient(
    # your cluster URL, from Module 0
    url="https://xyz-example.eu-west-1-0.aws.cloud.qdrant.io",  
    # your cluster API key, from Module 0
    api_key="<your-api-key>",                                    
)
# For quick, throwaway experiments without a server, you can also use:
# client = QdrantClient(":memory:")
```

### Creating a Collection

> Once connected, you create a collection by setting two parameters: the size of vectors it will accept and the distance metric used for similarity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once connected, you create a collection by setting two parameters: the size of the vectors it accepts and the distance metric used for similarity. <br>
Both come from your embedding model. 384 is the vector size of all-MiniLM-L6-v2, the model from Module 1, and cosine is the metric it was trained for.
```
Add information on the Embedding model

```python
client.create_collection(
    collection_name="articles",
    vectors_config=models.VectorParams(

>         # must match your embedding model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        # 384: the vector size of all-MiniLM-L6-v2, from Module 1
```

        size=384,                     
        distance=models.Distance.COSINE,
    ),
)
```

### Inserting a Point

> Each point carries an ID, a vector (the embedding of your content), and a payload (any metadata you want to filter or return later). Add it with `upsert`: it inserts a new point if the ID doesn't already exist, or updates that point in place if it does.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each point contains an ID, a vector that represents your content, and a payload with metadata you can use to filter or return results later. <br>
Use `upsert` to add a point to a collection. If the ID is new, Qdrant inserts the point. If the ID already exists, Qdrant updates the existing point.
```
Reads better

```python
from qdrant_client.models import PointStruct  # represents a single point: id, vector, and payload

client.upsert(
    collection_name="articles",
    points=[
        PointStruct(
            id=1,
            vector=[0.12, -0.87, 0.33, ...],   # 384-dim embedding
            payload={
                "title": "Car Repair Guide",
                "category": "automotive",
                "year": 2024,
                "region": "EU",
            },
        )
    ],
)
```

## 3. Distance Metrics

> When you query a collection, Qdrant uses the distance metric you chose at collection creation to score how similar your query vector is to the stored vectors, and returns the closest matches. The most common for text is cosine similarity. Scoring every stored vector this way would be too slow at scale, so Qdrant doesn't do a full scan by default; section 5 covers how the HNSW index finds close matches without checking every vector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you query a collection, Qdrant compares your query vector with the stored vectors using the distance metric you chose when creating the collection. For text embeddings, cosine similarity is the most common metric. <br> 
Checking every vector would be too slow for large collections. Instead, Qdrant uses an HNSW index to find the closest matches efficiently without scanning the entire collection. Section 5 explains how it works.
```
Less dense

| Metric | Notes |
|--------|-------|
| models.Distance.COSINE | Measures angle between vectors. Robust to magnitude differences. |
| models.Distance.DOT | Faster than cosine when vectors are unit-length at index time. |
| models.Distance.EUCLID | Measures absolute distance. Sensitive to vector magnitude. |
| models.Distance.MANHATTAN | Sum of absolute differences. Less sensitive to outliers than Euclidean; use when the embedding model was trained with L1. |

### Note

Choose your distance metric at collection creation; it cannot be changed later. If you need a different metric, create a new collection with that metric and re-ingest your data into it.

> To avoid breaking callers during that switch, point a [collection alias](/documentation/manage-data/collections/#collection-aliases) at whichever collection is currently live, and repoint it to the new one once re-ingestion is done. HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World) parameters like m and ef_construct, by contrast, can be updated after creation, and Qdrant will rebuild the index in the background with no downtime. Match your distance metric to what your embedding model was trained with: most sentence-transformer models use cosine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<aside role="status">
Choose a distance metric when you create a collection. The metric applies to the vector configuration for that collection, so choose one that your embedding model was trained on. Most sentence-transformer models, including the one used in Module 1, work with cosine similarity.

 If you choose the wrong metric, you have two options. You can create a new collection with the correct metric and re-ingest your data. A <a href="/documentation/manage-data/collections/#collection-aliases">collection alias</a> lets you switch to the new collection without changing your application.

Since v1.18, you can also add a second named vector with the correct metric to the existing collection. Re-embed your points into the new vector, then remove the old one. See <a href="/documentation/manage-data/collections/#update-vector-schema">Update Vector Schema</a> for details.
</aside>
```
Should look better as an aside
Added 1.18 distinction

- **Hierarchical layers**: The graph has multiple layers. The top layer has few nodes and long-range connections. Lower layers are denser with short-range connections.
- **Search by traversal**: Query entry starts at the top layer. The search "jumps" through neighbors, zooming in on the region of interest at each layer.
- **Approximate, not exact**: HNSW trades some recall (see below) for massive speed gains. Whether that trade-off is worth it depends on your data and queries, so measure recall on queries representative of your actual workload rather than assuming it.

### Tunable Parameters

HNSW has a few tunable parameters (`m`, `ef_construct`, and `hnsw_ef`) that trade off search speed, **recall** (the fraction of the true nearest neighbors your approximate search actually finds), memory usage, and indexing time. The defaults work well for most use cases; only tune them once you're measuring an actual recall or latency gap against a benchmark, not before. You haven't run a search yet at this point in the course, so we won't go deeper here; the [Qdrant Essentials Course](/course/essentials/day-2/what-is-hnsw/) covers HNSW tuning in full once you're ready for it.

> Real-world queries rarely stop at similarity alone; they usually need metadata constraints too. Rather than searching the full graph and filtering afterward, Qdrant applies those constraints during the HNSW traversal itself; see [Filterable HNSW](/articles/filterable-hnsw/) for how that works without falling back to brute force. Section 6 covers this next.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HNSW exposes three tunable parameters: `m`, `ef_construct`, and `hnsw_ef`. They balance search speed, recall (the fraction of true nearest neighbors found), memory usage, and indexing time. <br>
Defaults work well for most use cases, so tune them only after benchmarking a real recall or latency gap. This course won’t cover tuning in detail; see the [Qdrant Essentials Course](/course/essentials/day-2/what-is-hnsw/) when you’re ready.

Real-world queries often combine similarity with metadata filters. Qdrant applies these filters during HNSW traversal instead of searching the full graph and filtering afterward. See [Filterable HNSW](/articles/filterable-hnsw/) for details. Section 6 covers filtering next.
```
Tighten a bit, break down dense paragraph

- `FieldCondition` — checks one payload field; here, that `category` equals `"automotive"`

```python
from qdrant_client.models import Filter, FieldCondition, MatchValue

results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[...],
    query_filter=Filter(
        must=[
            FieldCondition(
                # the payload field to check
                key="category",  
                # keep only points where category == "automotive"
                match=MatchValue(value="automotive")  
            )
        ]
    ),
    limit=5,
)
```

### Filter Types

| Condition | What it does | Example use case |
|-----------|--------------|------------------|
| must | All conditions must be true (AND logic) | Category = automotive AND year >= 2022 |
| should | At least one condition must be true (OR logic) | Category = automotive OR category = transport |
| must_not | Exclude matching points | Exclude documents flagged as deleted or expired |
| Range | Numeric range comparisons (gte, lte, gt, lt) | year between 2020 and 2024 |
| Geo | Geospatial radius or bounding box filter | Restaurants within 5 km of user location |

### Index Your Filter Fields

> For fields you filter on frequently, create a payload index. Without an index, Qdrant scans every payload at query time. With one, Qdrant jumps directly to matching points rather than scanning the collection, making filtered queries run significantly faster. Use `client.create_payload_index()` for any field that appears in must, should, or must_not conditions. See [Payload Indexing](/documentation/manage-data/indexing/#payload-index) for the full list of index types and how to configure them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For fields you filter frequently, create a payload index. Without one, Qdrant may need to check payload values across many points at query time. With one, it can look up matching points directly, making filtered queries faster.

Use `client.create_payload_index()` for fields used in `must`, `should`, or `must_not` conditions. See [Payload Indexing](https://deploy-preview-2495--condescending-goldwasser-91acf0.netlify.app/documentation/manage-data/indexing/#payload-index) for supported index types and configuration options.
```
Break down paragraph

## 7. Chunking Strategies

> Embedding models have a maximum token limit, from 256 tokens for compact models like all-MiniLM-L6-v2 to 8,000+ tokens for larger ones (check your model's card). Long documents need to be split into chunks before embedding, and how you chunk affects retrieval quality: too large a chunk packs multiple topics into one embedding, making retrieval imprecise; too small a chunk loses the context needed for the result to be useful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Embedding models have a maximum token limit. `all-MiniLM-L6-v2` from Module 1 takes 256 tokens, larger models take 8,000 or more, and anything past the limit is dropped without an error. Check your model's card for its limit. <br>
Fitting isn't the only reason to split. A chunk is the unit that gets retrieved, so one vector covering several topics averages them together and matches every query weakly, while a chunk that's too small loses the context that made the result useful.
```
Break down

| Strategy | How it works | Trade-off |
|----------|--------------|-----------|
| Fixed-Size | Split every N tokens regardless of content boundaries | May cut sentences mid-thought |
| Semantic | New chunk when topic or meaning shifts | Slower; needs a model to detect shifts |
| Sliding Window | Chunks overlap to preserve context across the cut | More storage; duplicate content across results |

> This is a bare-bones overview; this module won't go deeper into choosing between them right now. For the full comparison and worked examples, see [Chunking Strategies](/course/essentials/day-1/chunking-strategies/#text-chunking-strategy-comparison) in the Qdrant Essentials course.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<aside role="status">
This module introduces the main chunking strategies but doesn’t explore how to choose between them in depth. For a detailed comparison and worked examples, see [Chunking Strategies](https://deploy-preview-2495--condescending-goldwasser-91acf0.netlify.app/course/essentials/day-1/chunking-strategies/#text-chunking-strategy-comparison) in the Qdrant Essentials course.
</aside>
```
Not a fan of saying bare-bones, aside seems fitting here

**Fixed-Size**

![](/courses/beginners/module-2/fixed-size.png)

**Semantic**

![](/courses/beginners/module-2/semantic.png)

**Sliding Window**

![](/courses/beginners/module-2/sliding-window.png)

## 8. Ingestion Pipeline: End-to-End

Let's put everything together. This section walks through the complete ingestion pipeline from cloud setup to your first query.

### Step 1: Connect to Your Cluster

> Module 0 walks through creating a free cluster at [cloud.qdrant.io](https://cloud.qdrant.io) and getting its URL and API key, screenshots included. With those in hand, connect the same way shown in section 2:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Module 0 walks you through creating a free cluster at [Qdrant Cloud](https://cloud.qdrant.io/) and retrieving its URL and API key. Use these credentials to initialize the Qdrant client:
```
Sounds better

- [Chunking Strategies](/course/essentials/day-1/chunking-strategies/)
  - Fixed-size, semantic, and sliding-window chunking with a full comparison table.
- [Indexing and HNSW](/documentation/manage-data/indexing/)
  - How the graph index is built, how search traverses it, and the available payload index types.
- [Filtering](/documentation/search/filtering/)
  - Full filter syntax: must, should, must_not, range, geo, and payload index configuration.
- [Qdrant Cloud](https://cloud.qdrant.io/)
  - Create a free cluster and follow the quickstart to run your first query in under 5 minutes.

**Go deeper:**

- [Filterable HNSW](/articles/filterable-hnsw/)
  - How Qdrant combines HNSW with payload filtering without falling back to brute force.
- [Efficient and Robust Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search Using HNSW Graphs](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320)
  - The original HNSW paper, for anyone who wants the algorithm itself, not just the summary.

**Definitions:**

- [Cosine similarity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosine_similarity)
- [Dot product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dot_product)
- [Euclidean distance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_distance)

> - [Nearest neighbor search](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nearest_neighbor_search)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## 8. Further Reading

- [Distance Metrics](/course/essentials/day-1/distance-metrics/) A closer look at cosine similarity, dot product, Euclidean, and Manhattan, and when each one fits.
- [What Is HNSW](/course/essentials/day-2/what-is-hnsw/) How the graph index is built and tuned, once you have real searches to measure it against.
- [Filtering](/documentation/search/filtering/) The full filter syntax, including range, geo, and nested conditions.
- [Payload Indexing](/documentation/manage-data/indexing/#payload-index) The available payload index types and how to configure them.
- [Chunking Strategies](/course/essentials/day-1/chunking-strategies/) The full comparison of fixed-size, semantic, and sliding-window chunking, with worked examples.
```

## What's Next: Module 3

In the next module, we'll break down:

- The two families of search: dense vs. sparse, and when each one fails
- How hybrid systems combine dense and sparse retrieval into a single query
- Setting up hybrid search in Qdrant and choosing a fusion strategy

> - Beyond text: applying the same retrieval primitives to images, audio, and video

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dense vectors capture meaning well, but they can miss exact keyword matches such as product codes or model numbers. <br> 
Module 3 introduces sparse vectors, which complement dense vectors by capturing exact terms and keywords. You’ll learn how to combine both in a single hybrid search query.
```
Just a hook is needed, no need to list each element of the less

---
title: "Module 2: First Principles of Vector Search"
short_description: "Module 2 of the Beginners course: how data is stored, indexed, and retrieved in Qdrant."
description: "Understand collections, points, vectors, payloads, HNSW, chunking, and the ingestion pipeline. Move from theory to actual system design in Qdrant."
isLesson: true
weight: 30
---

{{< date >}} Module 2 {{< /date >}}

<div class="video">
<iframe
  src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/zrUswSTeQMI?rel=0"
  frameborder="0"
  allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share"
  referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin"
  allowfullscreen>
</iframe>

> </div>

Reviewer: Video should go below the lesson title, with a short description. See the Qdrant Essentials course for example

Reviewer 3: done

## 2. Core Data Model

Qdrant organizes data in a simple three-level hierarchy. Understanding this structure is the foundation for everything else in the course.

```
Collection
    └── Point
        ├── id
        ├── vector
        └── payload
```

<!--
TODO (image regen, blocks shipping): data-model.png has the banned term baked
into its subtitle (it uses "vector database", and an em-dash). Rebuild from the
Docs/Diagrams Figma library with palette tokens. Corrected subtitle text:
"Each point in a vector search engine wraps three pieces together: an ID, a
vector, and a payload." Use "vector search engine", never "vector database",
and no em-dashes.
-->
![Data model hierarchy: a collection contains points, and each point wraps together an ID, a vector, and a payload](/courses/beginners/module-2/data-model.png)

### Collection

Like a table in a relational database. Stores vectors of a fixed size and a chosen distance metric. Every point in a collection must have a vector of the same dimension.

### Point

The atomic unit of data. Every point has an ID (integer or UUID), a vector, and an optional payload. Points are what you search, retrieve, and filter.

### Vector

> A list of floating-point numbers (such as 384 or 768 values) that represent the meaning of the original content. Similar content produces similar vectors.

Reviewer: >(such as 384 or 768 values)

add "known as dimensions"

### Payload

Arbitrary JSON metadata attached to a point. Used for filtering, retrieval scoping, and result enrichment. Can hold strings, numbers, booleans, geo coordinates, or arrays.

<!--
TODO (verify image pairing): swapped so the payload concept uses payload.png and
the filtering section (§6) uses data-flow-2.png. The filenames were previously
crossed. Confirm the actual image contents match these sections.
-->
![A point's payload is JSON metadata attached alongside its vector, such as title, category, year, and region](/courses/beginners/module-2/payload.png)

### Creating a Collection

When you create a collection, you fix two things: the size of vectors it will accept and the distance metric used for similarity.

```python
from qdrant_client import QdrantClient, models

> client = QdrantClient(":memory:")  # or use cloud URL + API key

Reviewer: Shouldn't we not restrict the client to memory mode?

| Metric | Notes |
|--------|-------|
| models.Distance.COSINE | Measures angle between vectors. Robust to magnitude differences. |
| models.Distance.DOT | Faster than cosine when vectors are unit-length at index time. |
| models.Distance.EUCLID | Measures absolute distance. Sensitive to vector magnitude. |
| models.Distance.MANHATTAN | Sum of absolute differences. Less sensitive to outliers than Euclidean; use when the embedding model was trained with L1. |

### Rule

Choose your distance metric at collection creation; it cannot be changed later. Match it to the metric your embedding model was trained with. Most sentence-transformer models use cosine.

## 4. Top-K Retrieval

A search query is itself a vector. Qdrant finds the K points in the collection whose vectors are most similar to the query vector, ranked by similarity score.

```python
results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[0.12, -0.87, 0.33, ...],   # your query vector
    limit=3,                            # return top 3
)

for r in results.points:
    print(r.id, r.score, r.payload)
```

![Top-K Diagram](/courses/beginners/module-2/top-k.png)

### Why K Matters

> Returning too few results (K=3) misses relevant content. Returning too many (K=100) creates noise in results. A common pattern is to retrieve K=20–50 with Qdrant, then rerank to K=5. We'll explain reranking later.

Reviewer: > A common pattern is to retrieve K=20–50 with Qdrant, then rerank to K=5.

I never knew this was common advice. Where does it come from?

## 5. How Search Is Fast: HNSW

Searching millions of vectors by computing similarity against every single one (brute force) is prohibitively slow. Qdrant uses HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World), a graph-based approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) index that makes large-scale search fast without sacrificing meaningful accuracy.

<!--
TODO (image regen, blocks shipping): hnsw.png step callouts are numbered
backwards. Renumber top-to-bottom so the order matches how search actually
runs: 1 = enter at the top layer, 2 = navigate toward the query through
progressively denser layers, 3 = collect the K nearest neighbors at the bottom.
Also fix the spelling "neighbour" to "neighbor" (American English). Rebuild
from the Docs/Diagrams Figma library with palette tokens.
-->

> ![HNSW search enters at the top layer, navigates toward the query through progressively denser layers, and collects the K nearest neighbors at the bottom](/courses/beginners/module-2/hnsw.png)

Reviewer: Steps 1-3 are labeled in reverse

        ef_construct=100,  # default: 100
    ),
)

# Override ef at query time for recall vs. speed trade-off:
results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[...],
    search_params=models.SearchParams(hnsw_ef=128),
    limit=10,
)
```
To learn more about tuning HNSW, see the comprehensive [Qdrant Essentials Course](/course/essentials/day-2/what-is-hnsw/).

### Starting Point

Default values (m=16, ef_construct=100) work well for most use cases. Only tune if you're measuring a recall or latency gap against a benchmark.

## 6. Payload Filtering

Real-world search is always similarity plus constraints. Payload filtering lets you apply hard conditions during HNSW traversal, not after retrieval. This keeps results both semantically relevant and legally/logically valid.

```python
from qdrant_client.models import Filter, FieldCondition, MatchValue

results = client.query_points(
    collection_name="articles",
    query=[...],
    query_filter=Filter(
        must=[
            FieldCondition(
                key="category",
                match=MatchValue(value="automotive")
            )
        ]
    ),
    limit=5,
)
```

> ![A payload filter narrows a similarity search to only points whose metadata matches a condition, such as category equals automotive](/courses/beginners/module-2/data-flow-2.png)

Reviewer: This diagram has more info on it than just payload filtering, and seems a better diagram would fit

Reviewer: still a good diagram to include somewhere though

### Filter Types

| Condition | What it does | Example use case |
|-----------|--------------|------------------|
| must | All conditions must be true (AND logic) | Category = automotive AND year >= 2022 |
| should | At least one condition must be true (OR logic) | Category = automotive OR category = transport |
| must_not | Exclude matching points | Exclude documents flagged as deleted or expired |
| Range | Numeric range comparisons (gte, lte, gt, lt) | year between 2020 and 2024 |
| Geo | Geospatial radius or bounding box filter | Restaurants within 5 km of user location |

### Index Your Filter Fields

> For fields you filter on frequently, create a payload index. Without an index, Qdrant scans every payload at query time. With one, filtered queries run in logarithmic time. Use client.create_payload_index() for any field that appears in must, should, or must_not conditions. See [Payload Indexing](/documentation/manage-data/indexing/#payload-index) for the full list of index types and how to configure them.

Reviewer: > client.create_payload_index()

should be formatted:

> `client.create_payload_index()`

### Fixed-Size

Splits text every N tokens regardless of content boundaries. Simple and fast, but it can cut sentences mid-thought.

![Fixed-size chunking splits text every N words regardless of content boundaries](/courses/beginners/module-2/fixed-size.png)

### Semantic

Creates a new chunk when the topic or meaning shifts significantly, keeping each chunk focused on one idea.

![Semantic chunking splits text at meaning boundaries, keeping each topic in its own chunk](/courses/beginners/module-2/semantic.png)

### Sliding Window

Chunks overlap with each other so context carries across chunk boundaries instead of being lost at the cut.

![Sliding window chunking overlaps consecutive chunks to preserve context across boundaries](/courses/beginners/module-2/sliding-window.png)

You can learn more about chunking strategies in the [Chunking Strategies](/course/essentials/day-1/chunking-strategies/#text-chunking-strategy-comparison) section from the Qdrant Essentials course.

## 8. Ingestion Pipeline: End-to-End

Let's put everything together. This section walks through the complete ingestion pipeline from cloud setup to your first query.

### Step 1: Create a Free Cluster

> Start with a free cluster at [cloud.qdrant.io](https://cloud.qdrant.io). Once created, you'll have a URL and an API key. You can also follow along the code in the Google Colab notebook [here](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1qKc-ybmYOjXdoMAAoaYz7VKJLgUdCmP5?usp=sharing).

Reviewer: colab notebooks need to reference python notebooks in qdrant/examples repo
